
CS 405G: Introduction to Database Systems
Term Project
(100 points)
Project Description
In this project, you will work in groups of four members to design and implement a database
application. The purpose of the project is to apply the fundamental database design principles, use
MySQL to create and manipulate a database, and develop a Python application to interact with the
database.
The application will help a middle school manage its after-school club activities by maintaining the
following information:
• Clubs and their scheduled meetings (date, time, description, classroom), field-trip events
(date, time, description), annual budgets, and expenses
• Faculty members and the clubs they advise
• Students and their club memberships
Assumptions
You may assume the following:
• Each club has a unique club name (e.g., Band, Orchestra, Speech, MathCounts, Choir, etc.)
• A club’s budget may vary from year to year
• Each club schedules multiple meetings and events each year
• A club has exactly one advisor each year, but the advisor may change from year to year
• A faculty member may advise multiple clubs
• A student may join multiple clubs, and their club memberships may change across different
years
Application Functionalities
The application should support the following functionalities:
1. Manage clubs and their associated information
a) Add or delete club meetings and events
b) View all students in a specific club for a given year
c) View all clubs and their faculty advisors for a given year
d) View all meetings and events for a specific club for a given year
e) Record the annual budget allocated to each club
f) Record expenses for each club
g) Report the total expenses and remaining budget for a club in a given year
h) Report the total budget of all clubs in a given year
2. Manage faculty members who advise clubs
a) Assign a faculty advisor to a club in a year
b) List all clubs advised by a faculty member
3. Manage students and their club memberships
a) Allow students to join or leave a club
b) List all members of a club
c) List all clubs that a student belongs to
d) View all club meetings and events a student should attend on a specific date
4. Manage scheduling conflicts
a) Prevent double-booking of classrooms for meetings held by different clubs
b) Prevent a club from scheduling overlapping meetings
Part I (30 pts): Problem Definition and ER Diagram
Due: Wednesday, April 1
Assume the course instructor is your client for this database application. If you have any questions
about the application requirements, you should interview the client to clarifies the details before
finalizing your design.
You will need to write a clear problem statement describing the system to be developed. Your
problem statement should:
a) Clearly identify any assumptions you make about the application requirements
b) Specify any constraints that should be enforced in the system
After defining the problem, draw an Entity-Relationship (ER) diagram that represents your
proposed database design.
What to submit:
• PDF file that includes the problem statement and ER diagram.
Part II (20 pts): Relational Schema and Refinement
Due: Wednesday, April 8
Convert your ER diagram from Part I into a relational schema. Identify the primary key for each
relation.
Next, examine your relational schema to determine whether any of them suffer from design
problems such as redundancy or anomalies. If necessary, refine the schemas by decomposing them
into relations that satisfy BCNF or 3NF.
You should also justify that the final schemas are well designed by analyzing the functional
dependencies and outlining the normalization process.
What to submit:
• PDF file that includes the relational schema, refinement process and justification of the
final design.
Part III (40 pts): Database and Application Programs
Due: Monday, April 27
Create a database using MySQL and develop a Python program that allows users to access the
database. You are not required to populate the database with a large amount of data. However, the
database should contains sufficient sample data to demonstrate that your database design and
application functionalities work correctly. Your program should also provide a clear and user-
friendly interface for users to access and manage the data.
What to submit:
• MySQL script file that creates database objects (e.g., tables), defines all necessary
constraints, and insert initial sample data.
• Python source code for your application
• Readme file that describes how to set up the database, how to run the Python program,
and any required software or libraries.
Part IV (10 pts): Project Presentation
Monday, April 27 and Wednesday, April 29
Each group will present their project in class. The presentation should last 8~10 minutes, followed
by 2 minutes for questions. During the presentation, you should
• Present your database design
• Describe the key technical techniques used in your implementation
• Discuss any design and implementation challenges or related issues
• Share any lessons learned during the project
• Provide a live demonstration of your database application
What to submit as a group:
• Submit PowerPoint slides used in the presentation by the end of Wednesday, April 29
What to submit individually:
• Team member evaluation form
Other Requirements
• Every team should submit only one copy of the required files on Canvas. Be sure to include
the names of all team members in the submission.
• If you use any code that you did not write yourself (e.g., code found online, in books, or from
other courses), you must properly cite the source. Even if you found code and then modified
it, you must still say where the original code came from.
